to Carlos Fuentes.
We're on.
I'm going to just put this here.
We have two books here.
Yes.
These are narrated by dead people, for the most part.
For the most part.
And this is narrated by a fetus.
That's right.
Do I detect something here?
In terms of...
Well, it's life and death, and a continuity between one and the other, and the necessity of death in order to have life.
Death being the predecessor of life, the creator of life, or inevitable deaths are the source of the continuity of life.
That's the way we Mexicans look at it.
Death is the end, or death separated from life.
That does not come within our world picture.
Do you think of these in terms of themes when you're writing the novellas?
No, I think in terms of voices.
What voices I would like for a given theme or a given story.
Would it be for me the best voice, the most original voice, the most resonant voice?
We're dealing with personas always, the masses, right?
Did you conceive of this new book as novellas, five novellas?
Yeah, but interlocked.
Yeah.
And with, of course, the central metaphor being the orange tree.
The orange tree is nature witnessing.
But it seems to be a metaphor for many, many things in this book.
I guess, do we start?
Do you start with this orange tree, this metaphor?
No, it came.
It came.
The orange tree suddenly sprang from many grounds.
I didn't imagine it that way.
I didn't know when I began writing the first story, which was The Two Shores, I had no idea.
There would be four of the stories.
I had no idea there would be an orange tree.
No.
What a wonderful interview with you in The Letters of Work.
Oh, yes, yes, yes.
And it goes back a few years.
I think it's 1981.
Yeah.
Right.
And in fact, I think that you were working on this book at that time.
On Christopher Unborn, yeah.
And you really didn't want to say that much about it.
But you also said that you see all of your books as more or less cut from whole files.
Well, yes, they're part of a whole series of novels, a fictional fresco, if you want to call it, called The Age of Time, which is 28 novels, of which I've written 19 up till now, 19 titles, and which is appearing under the...
sign of Alfaguara, which is a great publishing house in Spain and Mexico.
They're publishing the first volume in May.
You really can see ahead this far?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
At a given moment in your career, you can't see the throw between all your work.
You must see it.
There are writers who see that.
There are other writers who don't.
I mean, you're Balzac or you're Flaubert kind of writer.
I'm more of a Balzacian.
and the writer who can see the consolation, the unity between the several works.
I read in a review of this book here that in the Spanish edition there is a subtitle, The Circles of Time.
That's right, yes.
And I wonder if you could first explain that a bit, and then tell me why we don't have it.
It's about a Spanish author, because a critic had written a book of essays called The Circles of Time,
and sued me.
I had no idea she had done this book.
And I said, you don't have to sue me.
I'll simply drop the title.
It's not that important.
I thought there was an editorial reason.
No, no, no.
It was a legal question, but I agreed wholeheartedly not to use the subtitle.
What the hell?
I don't know how it is in Mexico or Spain, but you cannot copyright a title in this country.
Nobody has a copyright on a title.
Oh, in Mexico you do.
You do.
Oh, yes, absolutely.
I mean, if I wanted to call a book Gone with the Wind... You could do it.
...how foolish enough to do it, you could do it, you know.
Well, well... But she was going to sue you.
Well, bless Obligio, it was a lady, so I said, keep your title, be happy with it, I won't take it away.
But did you like the Circles of Time?
Yeah, because the whole series is called The Age of Time, so it's always a reference to time.
the time element and uh well if i can put it into the title it's okay but it's not indispensable do you find your vision changing from book to book yes of course of course the book teaches you a lot teaches the author a lot you're educating yourself constantly uh in what respect would you say i mean for example the vision changes even in um
in a retrospective way because you end up by writing the books you wanted to write when you were a young man and didn't know how to.
The Old Gringo is a novel that I conceived when I was 17 years old.
I read the tales of Ambrose Bierce.
I found it very striking that he was a writer who had written
the best stories of the American Civil War, I think, in the midst of life, stories of soldiers and civilians.
And we've come to die in our own civil war in Mexico.
It struck me very much.
And I started jotting down things about beers in Mexico and crossing the desert.
Then I made a trip up Chihuahua, where we died and saw the desert and wrote more in 1964.
And then until 1980, I had the complete vision of the novel.
It took me all that time.
And there it was a conscious fact, but how many novels are brewing within you ever since you were Carlos Unborn?
Thank you.
I'm sure.
You know, the point of Christopher Unborn is that an unborn child has all the rings of memory.
in his hands.
He can remember his whole genetic catalog.
Way, way, way, way back.
The DNA, as far as it goes, he remembers it.
And then the condition for being born is to forget everything.
And that is why there is the Jewish tradition of the angel coming down upon you when you're born and hitting you right here and creating this
You know, there's this dent between this cleft, which is the sign of the angel of amnesia, the angel of forgetfulness, that has hit you, that now you have to begin all over again.
Now, you mentioned General Spears, and I had read that, he's an American, and that you, although your English is excellent, how many languages?
Five, yeah, I'm one of those.
Yeah, I have that kind of problem, yes, yes.
With myself into the speech and the mind of Ambrose Beers, it was quite a feat.
Many, many people have, you know,
You were asked also if you ever thought of writing in English, and I mean, that's, that's, that's... Only communication, essays, journalism, literature.
No, impossible.
I don't mean in English.
No way.
And you actually do dream in a language.
Oh, yes.
Consult your dreams and you see.
This is a very funny book.
I mean, you smile.
I hope so.
That is my intention.
The themes are deep.
No question about this.
And I think that people who don't know your writing probably
I mean, are you a naturally funny man?
I don't know, but I'm funny.
My children think so.
They've always thought I was very funny.
which makes them lose some respect for me.
Who do you hope to reach with these novels?
Well, listen, this has been a highly successful book in the Spanish language.
It has sold 100,000 copies in a year in Spanish.
And I know it has reached so many people who see in it a kind of song to the origins of our culture, to who we are.
We're in a process, I think, in Latin America...
of thinking less how many are we and more who are we.
There's a big question about who we are, where we come from, what we mean as we reach the millennium.
That's why so much historical fiction is being written.
There are many, many writers who are taking the historical thing as though we wanted to have a balance before the new millennium begins.
I think the book has reached so many people in Spain and Latin America precisely because of the nature of the themes, because of the insistence on the birth of the culture, the birth of the nation, the origins.
Do you feel a move to... I mean, you are rewriting history in some respects, too.
Tell me a little bit about that.
I mean, are you rewriting history in a... Well, history has been rewritten, too.
It's not that I rewrite it.
History is going to be written every single day.
There would be no history if we didn't rethink it, rewrite it, relive it.
If we were just stuck with a bunch of arid facts, there would be no history.
We were forgotten.
Then we remember history because we desire it, because we experience it, because we live it today.
It is the history we live today that matters, after all.
And that is a history open to many, many interpretations.
García Márquez was telling me that he recently had a talk with Frederick Forsythe, because García Márquez is writing a novel of terrorism in Colombia.
And, well, he admires the day of the jackals very much.
And he had this talk, and he told Forsythe, you know, I think it's a great book, the mechanics work very well, but it's not really the great book it could have been for one reason.
Watch it, Forsythe.
And Guzmachia, you did not kill General de Gaulle.
If only you had done that, you would have written a great novel.
And a hundred years from now, everybody would be convinced that de Gaulle was assassinated.
You missed your point.
You see, there is an argument also that one reason that is an excellent thriller is that even though we know how it turns out, he still manages to grip us to find out how it turns out.
Guzmachia admits that, but he insists on the point...
Of the next step that would have made it a great novel, an unforgettable novel, and a true novel.
That's funny.
You said once that being a bureaucrat taught you how to write.
No, no, being a lawyer.
Oh, well, and I know what you mean, Ted.
Whatever, being in public service, let's put it that way, or...
Well, it made me hunger so much for writing that I just wanted to get away from it and find my time for writing.
But then studying law also is a very good lesson for a writer, because I think it was Stendhal who said that the French Civil Code, the Code Napoléon, is probably the best model a novelist has for structure and order.
and exposition, probably he's right.
But I appreciate all the things I've done in my life.
I think I've all been able to channel them all into literature, finally.
I'm glad about that.
You've also been quoted as saying that you do not feel that as a whiter you represent Mexico?
Of course not.
I'm just an individual.
Right.
I don't represent a country.
Nobody cares you represent a country, and if you think you represent a country, you're in trouble.
Well, there are many writers in Mexico.
Indeed, and there are also many great writers in Latin America.
And I think that you have said that you are brothers and sisters, I guess, in that respect.
Yeah, that's another thing I've said is that we are writing the same novel.
We're writing one big Latin American saga with a Colombian chapter by García Márquez, a Peruvian chapter by Vargas Llosa, etc.
And also, I think another thing that you've expressed is that
the english novel of course has one the novel in english has one in uninterrupted history yeah whereas you know you start with uh there's nothing afterwards very little after absolutely yeah and then you kind of pick up again uh right with uh almost with a vengeance of the 20th century i guess that's right and that has a lot to do with uh
what independence meant for us.
It meant denying that we had an Indian and an African and an Iberian past.
We were kind of ashamed of them.
These are barbaric or backward-looking traditions.
We wanted to be Europeans as soon as possible.
We wanted to look forward.
So we adapted the literary traditions of the moment in Europe, realism, naturalism.
And through them we could not recover the wealth of the Indian
and African and Iberian traditions.
Once we did that, we started writing very good novels.
I think you've also said, though, that the poets kind of... Yeah.
There is an uninterrupted line of poetry throughout Latin America.
Things, colonial times, great Baroque poets of the 16th, 17th century.
They kept the torture of literature alive.
The Spanish colony did not admit the writing or publication of novels.
They were considered dangerous, dissolving, immoral.
So the first novel written in Latin America appeared in 1821, The Itching Parrot by Jorando de Lusatari.
And it was a kind of picaresque tale.
But the tradition then is recent and therefore weak, whereas the tradition of poetry comes all the way from the colony.
I've read where you've said that you
You can write about your obsessions.
Who doesn't?
Every writer, I think.
But you're obsessed.
Every writer is obsessed.
And I wonder if you could tell me something about your obsessions.
Well, many of my obsessions have to do with the intersection of personal life and history.
The way they intersect, the way they affect each other.
It has to do with the uses of time.
What is time?
How do you employ time?
How do time affect you?
How does one live under time?
I'm very obsessed by the capacity for creating another world through imagination, a world that
is not a reflection of reality, but that adds something that did not exist before, which I think is the great challenge of the artist to read and write the unwritten and unread part of the world.
Just as the plastic artist sees the unseen or invisible part of the world, or the great musician the unheard part of the world,
That is the contribution of the artist.
Something that did not exist before is suddenly there.
Did the Ninth Symphony exist before it was written?
Did Don Quixote exist before it was written?
Or David Copperfield?
No, they're there because of the intuition and art and imagination of the writer and author.
Trying to explain the creative process is almost impossible.
It's almost impossible, but there you are.
The products are there, and they remain.
We were all going to die, but these works of art remain, and it was a great homage to humanity, I think.
Do you re-lead your own works?
Never, never, never.
They're like children.
They cut the umbilical cord, and out they go.
They're no longer yours, once you're written.
I mean, there are... Can I say something else?
So there's never a thought that, gee, I mean, it's probably...
When you're done, you're happy with it.
You're not repentant to me.
Maybe I am repentant of a few things and a few books, of course, yes.
But I won't touch them.
Do you do readings?
Some of my kids are cross-eyed and albino.
I don't care.
They're mine.
I love them.
Do you do public readings?
Yeah.
I'm doing one tomorrow.
When you're reading, do you ever say... Yeah.
I start collecting myself.
I started reading other things around there.
Change the words a little bit.
As you go along.
You know a lot.
Uh-oh.
That's right.
What other writers do you read?
Do you read other writers, I guess, for pleasure?
Or as more or less a professional?
I'm a great poetry reader.
Poetry feeds me and nourishes me.
very much poetry of all the ages.
Then I read, more and more I re-read.
As I grow older, I go back to books I've loved, or I read great books that I haven't read, and I feel guilty about it.
I want to read them.
Then I feel, not an obligation, but a pleasure in reading my contemporaries.
and a special obligation to read what's new in Latin American literature.
Because we are so uncommunicated and so much talent appears and nobody notices it.
But I like to send clarion calls when I discover
Very good writers, as in this last trip I made to South America in Chile and Argentina.
Chile has a bevy of wonderful new novelists.
So does Argentina.
Nobody knows them outside their countries.
So I try to call attention to them, but that means I have to read them first.
It's very hard.
I know in the United States, for some reason, it's almost xenophobia here.
I mean, it's very hard.
It's not xenophobia.
But in many ways, it's so hard for fallen writers to be read here.
It's a big risk.
It's a big risk for a publisher.
A translation is costly.
And then will the book develop?
Good translations are costly.
And then the flip side of that is bad translations can destroy the good work, can't they?
Well, that is one of the themes of the orange screen.
Exactly.
Translators.
Creators.
Now, tell me a little bit about it.
I mean, I hate to, by the way, I'm deliberately not discussing the books because the books
I have to say that as an interviewer, the most challenging interviews are with the novelists, because we talk about things generally outside of the work, as far as I'm concerned.
Because if you come prepared, you read the books, and the books speak for themselves.
But I guess translation is decidedly a theme.
What do you think?
I mean, are you poking fun?
Is it history or is it crap?
No, no, no.
The fact is that I'm very struck by the fact that Mexico is a country founded by translators.
Because if the Spaniards had not found translators into the Indian languages and from the Indian languages into Spanish, they would have gotten nowhere.
But the translators have their own agenda.
The agenda of this translator, Jerónimo de Aguilar, was to make Cortés fail.
And every time Cortés tells the Indians, I come in peace, I am your friend, you say he comes in war, he wants to enslave you.
But it turns out the lie was the truth.
So where are you?
I hate to come across that you have an earlier interview, but I'm 15 years old, and they do
I do fascinate some of the statements that you made that you said that you wanted that all of your books are about fear.
Hmm.
Maybe I will... No, no, maybe I was thinking of Kafka more than a master.
That was about 81 when you said that.
Yeah, because I've just written a novel called Distant Relationship.
I think there's a more playful fact.
No, no, no.
I would backtrack on that one.
I told Big Cat is that.
very often in your writing.
That's a question of image, I guess.
Did you get much criticism from women?
Yeah, I've gotten a bit, but I'm writing from the heart of a very macho-oriented culture.
When I'm expressing the point of view of a character, or what a character is looking for,
We have lived tradition, it's no longer true, let me say it right away, but we have lived tradition in a society where a woman is seen as a nun or as a whore, and nothing in between.
Or, as we say in Mexico, my mother is a saint.
All the other women are whores, your mother included.
That'll get you good fight, won't it?
Yeah.
But now this is changing, of course, because women are playing such an important role in the professions, in politics, in all literature, all walks of life.
The most successful novelist ever in the history of Mexico is Laura Esquivel, the author of Black Water for Chocolate.
She's a woman.
And she said a very funny thing.
She was interviewed in Spain, and since the book is about cooking and all this, she was asked...
And then, is it true that cooking is a woman's second uterus?
And she answered, no, cooking is the only way women have of penetrating men.
Very interesting.
You know, Harvard, about two years ago, published two volumes.
I saw one, and I had a chance to read it.
Well, there you are, the most important figure of our literature, probably.
All our literature is a nun, a woman.
Yes.
But her work is a resonance, a body of work.
I mean, it hasn't lost a thing.
Oh, no, it's totally modern.
It's as good as modern Shakespeare, let's say.
Again, talking about a dead man's recollections, and it's kind of an interesting thing, too, isn't it?
As a letter, I would just actually think in terms of a dead man narrating.
Well, it's as audacious as putting yourself into the head of Richard III, or any other character.
It is an act of boldness.
They say, I dare enter the head of a criminal called Raskolnikov, and imagine it goes on.
It's the same thing.
I suppose, except that when we think of death, it is a... Well, you think of death as an extinction, but I don't.
Well, that's an important point.
And I'm not really mature now.
Although I like it very much.
Well, we're covering things quickly here, I have to say.
Are you comfortable with the novella form?
Very comfortable.
Very, very comfortable.
And I'm comfortable with the fact that in this country, the rears are not comfortable with the novella form.
They don't like it very much.
Why?
I don't know.
Mary Gordon did a collection of novellas last year, which I thought were for, I can't think of the title.
You know, this, this is, uh, along with the Russians, you are the people that have written the best novellas in the world.
There's a form that is perfected by the Russians and by the North Americans.
When you think of James and Faulkner, and, uh,
I think one of the most perfect novellas ever written is The Pilgrim Rock by Glenway Westcott.
It is absolute perfection.
And I can name many, many more.
Yes please.
Don't think of the death of Ivan Illich and the duel by Chekhov.
The Russians and the North Americans are the great masters of the form.
Why do you suppose that is?
The novella has a maritime familiarity.
You write a short story, you're really in a lake with a paddle boat.
You are writing a novel, you are taking the transatlantic into deep waters across the oceans.
But if you're writing a novella, you are in a yacht or a catch or a sailboat, hugging the shore.
You see the shore and you see the horizon at the same time.
It is a form of equilibrium, I assume, equilibrium of the soul, which is very satisfying.
It permits you to get to the poem quickly, not to lose too much time in psychology or character development or inscription.
You can't do all these things in a novella.
You have to find the essence of the story very, very quickly.
A short story is something else.
It's like a telegram, no?
Your mother died.
That's a short story.
It's one character in general.
I love the idea of connecting with five.
It really does make it one book.
It does make it one book, but I hope all readers are as intelligent as you are and see that connection.
For example, many people have criticized me in the Hispanic world for the Capuza story, saying it doesn't belong in this story.
I think it does belong, because the movie star is a modern conquistador, and because the women, especially in Spanish, are using a language, which is the language,
of the two sons of the conquistadores it is the language of the mestizos finally they have come into possession of a language that permits them to conquer the conquerors isn't it funny it never occurred to me that the story comes along it's been criticized for that you know and um i think it's uh also a story that permits me to link the stories because valera being a
a movie actor who can, in depth, represent the parts of all the other characters of the other four novelas.
So it ties many knots in that story.
It was based on an actual fat story.
I didn't know that.
Steve Cochran was the actor, played gangster roles in James Caggins, things like that, and got a big opportunity with Antonioni in the film In Italy.
And then nobody used him anymore, and finally he went on a trip to Acapulco,
And then the yard was left to drift because they couldn't, the women couldn't maneuver.
And it was finally found in Salvador by the Coast Guard, there was a dead actor there, about five days later.
It's a very true story.
I didn't realize that it had a foundation.
Let's see.
I have, I really hope that you have about 45 minutes and I don't know what else to do.
You have too much of your time to answer a lot of questions.
I guess one, the overwhelming, maybe if you could just give me a quote on your thoughts on the role of language, your sense of philosophy and the role of language in your country's history.
Well, I think in every single society, you don't have a language, you don't have a nation, you don't have a society, you don't have
You don't have politics, you don't have science, you don't have education, you don't have anything.
So I think the writer's role in any society to keep alive the vitality of the language, meaningfulness of the language, is essential.
It's not the powers that be tend to kidnap languages.
They love doing that.
The most terrible example perhaps in the 20th century is Hitler.
He managed to absolutely abduct the language of the German people, corrupt it completely, and leave them mute.
And I think it was Gunter Grass who said, well, we had to restore a great language that had been banalized beyond recognition by the Nazi regime.
And I think writers like Solzhenitsyn and the Soviet Union have had the same experience.
In Latin America, we have that experience of the corruption of the language by political power over time.
And here, although sometimes you don't realize it, the same thing happens.
When you get 80 years of Ronald Reagan sputtering the things he said, something happens to the language.
It's banalized.
I think something happens to the language.
Terribly banalized.
So it's very important for a writer to come back and fight for the meaningfulness of the language, the beauty of the language, the sense of the language.
I think it's so essential.
It is a great social function.
You can't get away from that.
Have you entered the word processor generation?
Very old-fashioned.
I'm very old-fashioned.
I write by hand my first draft.
Then I go on to a very old-fashioned machine.
Then I give it to my daughter, who's a wonderful computer.
She does it beautifully as I am.
But now she's gone on to produce television, so she doesn't take care of my manuscripts anymore.
I'll have to learn.
But do you do revisions on the, what?
Do you continue revisions when it's on the word process?
No, I never see the word process.
Oh, so really, it's done.
It gizzes me.
It gives me a headache.
So I see sheets.
I see sheets, galleys.
I correct the way I've always done it.
Are you painstaking whiter?
No, no, no.
I have a stage of the writing here.
I confess that.
It blows up.
Excuse me.
I think a lot.
I lay in my head.
It's what I do.
I read that when you were living in Princeton you used to give yourself a good walk in the afternoon.
You know that.
It's like a triangle.
You work out the creative process and come back.
In Princeton I learned to write in my head and gain much of time.
I think it had to deal with this Terry Waite.
They wouldn't even let him read.
He couldn't have a pencil.
He wrote the whole book in his life.
It was really good experience to talk to a writer who actually wrote the entire book in his life.
He had a wonderful job, I think.
Marvelous.
Do you remember the Gregory's story, Fahrenheit?
451.
451 were books being banned.
The character becomes Treasure Island, another one becomes Oliver Twist, and they learn the
You know, there's a Roman precedent for that.
I just finished writing a book about bibliomania, by the way.
It was published by Henry Holt early next year.
You know, the Romans were great collectors.
They built great libraries.
There was one Roman who was actually a very wealthy guy who had slaves with beautiful voices.
And one slave would be, he'd be, you know, another one would be, some people had books, they had living books, and they'd have their dinner.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Well, that's a bad idea.
It was a bad idea.
It was a pretty, uh,
Well, you know, one of the stories between Omancius as Scipio, the general of Scat, the principal character, and he was actually around his circle in Rome with Polybius and Terence, the playwright.
It was the origin of Latin literature.
And I tell that story in one of the novellas, which is the origin of Latin rhetoric, which is the origin of the Spanish language or such.
You know what, I think that I've got plenty of material, and I'm not going to take up too much of your time.
I wonder if you do me the honors.
Do you miss being involved in public rights?
I am involved in public rights.
To what degree now?
The degree of being commentator, critic, journalist, very close to Mexican politics, talking to political people.
So I feel very close to the public life, especially when things are moving so much in Mexico.
Especially with that tragedy over the last couple of weeks.
Oh, that's good.